Let's discuss a useful performance metric that you can use whenever
your ensemble algorithm utilizes bagging or a random row selection.
Remember that bagging involves drawing a sample of the original datasets rows,
with replacement for each tree in the ensemble.
It can be shown, that on average,
each tree makes use of about two-thirds of the observations.
The remaining one-third of the observations not used
to fit a given tree are called the out-of-bag observations.
For a given observation,
we can calculate something called the out-of-bag score.
This is the aggregated prediction of all the trees that
did not have that observation in their bag.
Since, on average, each bag makes use of two-thirds of the original observations,
a given sample will be in two-thirds of the bags,
and not in one-third of the bags on average.
So if B is the number of trees in the ensemble,
that will be B divided by three out-of-bag predictions for a given observation.
These predictions can be aggregated to obtain
a single out-of-bag prediction for each observation.
For a regression model,
they can be averaged,
and for a classification model,
the majority vote can be used.
Then the out-of-bag error can be calculated for the entire dataset.
This is a useful way to obtain a test error metric,
since the trees used to obtain the prediction for
each observation were not fit using that observation.